In our Yanomami forest...
there's no such thing as paper,
notebooks, pencils, pens,
erasers, blackboards...
We also don't know
how to make such things...
We know how to speak.
We talk, we chat,
we perform ceremonial dialogues,
shamanism.
As if we were another species,
in another world,
The discourse, logic, perspective
of that human race
was so different from the one
that arrived
that for a long time there
really wasn't any dialogue.
Some would speak Portuguese,
and others would speak Tupi,
Krenak, Xavante, Yanomami,
Pancararu, Kiriri,
Pataxó, Xucuru…
There were so many of different peoples,
that linguists say there were between
900 and 1,100 languages at the time;
as if you were in the woods
and started hearing
thrushes, great kiskadees,
chestnut-bellied seed finches, woodpeckers,
all these different voices and sounds,
and you were trying to understand,
was this an orchestra
or just cacophony?
In fact, in some native languages,
in some of the mother tongues
that have survived,
some expressions are literally
the phonetic representation
of a bird's voice.
BIRD TONGUE
Portuguese was imposed through domination
in the form of forced labor and
acculturation upon indigenous people
and enslaved Africans.
Since these individuals were
stripped of their culture
and their humanity,
given that slaves were reduced
to the condition of chattels,
they had no identity,
no family, no language.
When you kill a culture,
you kill a people.
Abdias do Nascimento
addressed this in his book
The Genocide of the Black Brazilian.
He said that genocide means
any type of annihilation,
be it political or cultural.
When you kill a language,
you kill a people
you kill a culture, a people.
This is precisely the very
violent process of colonization.
It uses violence to enforce,
to legitimate the discourse
of the victor.
DOMINANT - LANGUAGES - DOMINATED
I want to talk about difference,
and there's a dearth of information about
Brazilian Sign Language (LIBRAS).
It's very complicated, since it is
overwhelmingly dominated by Portuguese
It's been many years in the making.
We can also talk about
indigenous and racial issues,
all the particular aspects of languages
influenced by Portuguese.
In the late 19th century,
Brazil's ruling classes,
with their racist plans for
"whitening" the population,
chose their default language,
the standard for literary language,
their model language to be
Portuguese as is spoken in Portugal.
This created a problem
that escalated over time.
Even our own grammar books,
for example, say that
an unstressed pronoun
should follow the verb.
"Parece-ME que é assim."
So the pronoun, ME, comes after
the verb, Parece: "Parece-ME."
But is this where we usually place
our pronouns in Brazilian Portuguese?
How do we actually say this sentence?
We say, "ME parece que não é assim."
I really love the journeys
words take over time.
I think that when
we adopt the mindset
that there is a standard
grammar, by the book or dictionary,
we often blind ourselves
from seeing the beauty
of the new forms words take on.
As an example, I like to
compare the word "floresta."
We are so used to seeing
the word, "floresta," and
translating it into English as "forest,"
or Italian as "foresta," not caring that
that there is no "L" between the "F"
and the "O" in these target languages.
But that "L" is found in the Spanish and
Portuguese, because the Iberian Peninsula
and its languages underwent
semantic contamination.
This contamination linked
the Vulgar Latin word "foresta,"
which predates "floresta,"
to the idea of a "flor" or flower.
People then imagined flowers in the
forest, so we started saying "floresta,"
So, a word transforms to reflect
its meaning, thus enriching the word
and makes that word unique
in comparison to its English
or Italian versions.
It is barbaric and beautiful
at the same time. Precious.
I teach LIBRAS
(Brazilian Sign Language)
and I really notice the
transformation of our language.
For example,
There was a class
where a deaf teacher had a brush
with student who could hear.
The teacher came to me and said,
"Oh, that hearing student is handful
because she learned LIBRAS all wrong!"
I asked, "Oh really?
What sign did she use?"
The teacher answered
with the sign for "sweet."
When I saw that, it conjured up
fond memories of the old days!
Back in the day, this sign meant
"sweet" at schools for the deaf.
I asked the teacher,
"Is your student an older woman?"
She answered, "Yes, yes!"
So I went over and asked the student,
"Who who taught you this sign?"
"Oh, what memories! That's the
sign for old, I'd almost forgotten it!"
That's just how she learned how to sign.
And today, we use the same sign for "sweet."
The Brazilian Portuguese
is over 500 years old.
Brazilian sign language, LIBRAS, has
been around for 20 years... give or take.
So... from 2002 to now...
that's when it was legally recognized
and disseminated.
Do you see the difference?
One has been around for 500 years,
the other for 20.
We have a language that's been
around and recognized for 500 years,
and another that's 20 years
old and has just showed up!